***ANSWER ALL QUESTIONS BELOW***

Why do we need data structure?
Answer:
1-each Data Structure allows data to be stored in a specific manner.
2-Data structure allows efficient data search and retrieval.
3-Specific Data Structures are designed to work for specific problems;
4-it allows managing large amount of data such as large databases and indexing services such as Hash table


What are the various operations that can be performed on different data structures?
Answer:
1-Insertion: adding new record to Data structure;
2-Deletion: Removing particular record from the data structure.
3-Searching: Finding the location of the record in data structure.
4-Sorting: Arranging records in a specific order.
5-Merging: Combining the records from different data structures to single data structure.
6-Traversing:Accessing and processing records .

When would we use data structures in the real world?
Answer:
1-Compiler Design.
2-Operating System.
3-Database Management System
4-Statistical analysis package
5-Numerical Analysis.
6-Graphics.
7-Artificial Intelligence

What is an Array?
Answer:
An array id a Data Structure containing a number of a same data type elements. Array is
index based , first element of the array is stored at index 0 index.

What is the difference between Array and ArrayList?
Answer:
1- Array length is fixed but ArrayList length is dynamic .
2-Arrays can contain primitive and non-primitive data type but ArrayList contain only non-primitive data type(objects);
3- Array element's can be accessed  by using an index [], ArrayList has a set of methods.

What is a LinkedList?
Answer:
LinkedList in Java. Linked List are linear data structures where the elements are not stored in contiguous locations and
 every element is a separate object
 with a data part and address part. The elements are linked using pointers and addresses.

How is an Array different from LinkedList?
Answer:
     1. An array element is having index number, but a node is having reference to next node.
     2. In array each element is independent, does not have any connection to the other element
        on the other hand in linked list each node are connected by previous node.
     3. In Linked list, location or address of elements is stored in the link part of previous
        element/node. In array, no pointers are used like linked list, so no need of extra space
        in memory for pointer.
     4. Linked list consumed extra memory as the link location need to be saved in the linked
        part of the previous elements in case of array it is not required.

What is a Queue?
Answer:
Queue represents a data structure designed to have elements inserted at the end of the queue,
and elements removed from the beginning of the queue.

What is a Stack (not Java memory - refers to data structure)?
Answer:
Stack is linear data structure where elements can be accessed on the basis of LIFO.

What are FIFO and LIFO?
Answer:
FIFO: Stands for "First In First Out" is a method in which items are processed  in the order they have been entered.
Certain data structures like Queue and other variants of Queue uses FIFO approaches for processing data.

LIFO: Stands for "Last In First Out"  is a method for handling data structures where the first element is processed last
and the last element is processed first. In Stack elements can be accessed on the basis of LIFO.

Explain Big O Notation?
Answer:
Big O notation is a mathematical notation that describes the limiting behavior of a function when the argument tends towards a particular value or infinity.

What is the best case to search an element from an array?
Answer:
Binary search & sorting algorithm.

What is the worst case to search an element from an array?
Answer:

Describe what a tree data structure is?
Answer:
A tree is a nonlinear data structure whereas arrays, linked lists, stacks and queues are linear data structures.
  It can be empty of nodes or a tree can be a structure consisting of one node called the root and zero or one or more
  sub-trees.

Describe what a graph data structure is?
Answer:
Graph is a non-linear data structure consisting of nodes and edges. The nodes are sometimes also referred to as
vertices and the edges are lines or arcs that connect any two nodes in the graph. For example, in Facebook,
each person is represented with a vertex(or node). Each node is a structure and contains information like
person id, name, gender, locale etc.

What is the difference between the HashTable and HashMap?
Answer:
HashTable is synchronized, HashMap is not. Therefore it makes HashMap efficient with non-threaded applications
because unsynchronized objects perform better than synchronized objects. HashTable do not allow null keys or values
where HashMap does allow one null key and unlimited null values.

What are the major data structures used in the following areas : RDBMS, Network data model and Hierarchical data model
Answer:
RDBMS, Network data model and Hierarchical data model.
RDBMS----->Arrays.
Network data model----->Graph;
Hierarchical data model-----> Tree.

How do HashMaps work in Java? How do they store values, and when are they useful?
Answer:
HashMap implements  MAP interface it  works on the principle of Hashing. It stores elements as key-value pairs.
Java has a hash function which called hashCode(). The hashCode() method is implemented in the Object class and therefore
each class in Java inherits it.The hash code provides the hash value.

What is ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException in java? When does it occur?
Answer:
ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException is an Exception that we need to handle. it is thrown to indicate that we are trying to
access array element with an illegal index.
This exception is thrown when the index is either negative or greater than or equal to the size of the array.

What are the different ways of copying an array into another array?
Answer:
1-Create a new array of the same length as the original array  and copy each element.

2-Use the clone method of the array. Clone methods create a new array of the same size.
int [] b=a.clone(); where a is the original array.

3-Use System.arraycopy() method.It is another method that directly copies one array to another. It has following syntax:
System.arraycopy(a,0,b,0,a.length);

4-We can directly copy one array to another by using Arrays.copyOf() method. It has following syntax.
b=Arrays.copyOf(a,a.length);


What is DFS and BFS?
Answer:
Depth-first search (DFS) is an algorithm for traversing or searching tree or graph data structure.
This one starts at the root and explores as far as possible along each branch before backtracking.
Breadth-first search (BFS) is an algorithm for traversing or searching tree or graph data structure.
It starts at the tree roots and explores the neighbour nodes first before visiting to the next level of neighbours.

What is Recursion?
Answer:
It is the process where a method calls itself inside the method. the method which causes recursion is called recursive method.

What are linear and non-linear data Structures?
Answer:
Linear Data Structures: The data structure where data items are organized sequentially or linearly where data
elements attached one after another is called linear data structure.
Examples of linear data structures are Arrays, Stack, Queue and Linked List.
NonLinear Data Structures: The data structure where data items are not organized sequentially is called non
-linear data structure. Examples of nonlinear data structures are Trees and Graphs.


Outline different sorting algorithms and their time complexities:
     1.Bubble sort: It is a comparison algorithm. It works by repeatedly stepping
     through the list to be sorted, comparing each pair of adjacent items and swapping them
     if they are in the wrong order. The pass through the list is repeated until no swaps are
     needed, which indicates that the list is sorted.
     Worst case performance: O(n2)
     Best case performance: O(n)
     Average case performance: O(n2)
     Worst case space complexity: O(n) total, O(1) auxiliary
     Bubble sort is not a practical sorting algorithm when n is large.

     2.Selection sort: It is an in-place comparison sort.Selection sort is noted for its simplicity,
     and also has performance advantages over more complicated algorithms in certain situations.
     Worst case performance: O(n2)
     Best case performance: O(n2)
     Average case performance: O(n2)
     Worst case space complexity: O(n) total, O(1) auxiliary

     3.Insertion sort: It is a comparison sort in which the sorted array (or list) is built one entry
     at a time. It is much less efficient on large lists than more advanced algorithms such as quicksort,
     heapsort, or merge sort.
     Worst case performance: O(n2)
     Best case performance: O(n)
     Average case performance: O(n2)
     Worst case space complexity: O(n) total, O(1) auxiliary

     4. Merge sort: It is an O(n log n) comparison-based sorting algorithm.
     Worst case performance: O(n log n)
     Best case performance: O(n log n) typical
     Average case performance: O(n log n)
     Worst case space complexity: O(n) total, O(n) auxiliary

     5.Quick sort: It is similar to merge sort in many ways. It divides the elements to be sorted into
     two groups, sorts the two groups by recursive calls, and combines the two sorted groups into
     a single array of sorted values.
     The choice of a good pivot element is critical to the efficiency of the quicksort algorithm.
     If we can ensure that the pivot element is near the median of the array values, then quicksort is very efficient.
     on average, makes O(n log n) comparisons to sort n items, in the worst case, it makes O(n2) comparisons


Draw a table with time complexity in which it will summarize all the data structure feature's advantages and disadvantages.
  a) In terms of Accessing elements:
  b) In terms of Inserting elements:
  c) In terms of Searching elements:
  d) In terms of Removing elements: